Hello everyone. Welcome to online. This week we are going to talk about phonetics and phonology. So that's done. I will be presenting, every week, I will be presenting the key terms. You'd have to familiarize yourself with. These terms necessary in order for you to follow the explanation and the analysis. And I will be explaining and introducing the absolutely the most relevant technology. I will not overburden you with too much new stuff in terms of terms and labels, but only the absolutely necessary things for you in order to follow the material properly and to prepare for the exam. Because I'm quite a lot of these concepts will feature in both the midterm and the final. So let's start. The key terms here are obviously phonetics, is all about sounds, how we produce, how we process and perceive sounds in language. And it will be looking at consonants and vowels, which is what languages have. And we will look at places of articulation, as well as manners of articulation, so where and how those sounds are produced. And I gave you some examples here on the first slide. The bilabial means both lips, seven volt. Labial dental means lips and teeth, etc. Manners of articulation would involve stops and fricatives. So e.g. stock will be stopped when you're producing. Fricative would be there is a friction involved. Then there'll be obstruents. Sonorants qualifications are obstruents, but there's an obstacle. Sonorant is more of a strong sound or sound production and will be introduced to the international phonetic alphabet that we will use in order to describe sounds. Because you know, lots of ways to spell the same sound in English. In other languages, you spell the sound with any pronounced differently depending on location, what's surrounding that, that's a particular label. So we're gonna be looking at now, sounds are labeled indigent, national phonetic alphabet that is used to legal all the sounds of all the languages regardless of individual spellings. We look at co-articulation. Sounds produced same together very closely. We'll look at separate segments which are explained later where those eyes will come along. And we will also look at phonemes and allophones are very important distinction. We're moving now to phonology, which deals with those sounds in a language that are relevant as indicators of different meanings in the same position, at the same position. But they contribute to the difference in meaning in language then phonemes, if they're in different positions and there is no difference in meaning. They are. I will help you understand how to distinguish between phonemes and allophones in the language. Because sometimes what? A phoneme in one language is an allophone in another line. That is a very interesting phenomenon. So we'll see a lot of language differences in that respect. And then I'll explain the other concepts listed here. Minimal pairs contrast in complimentary distribution of sounds, palm tactics, and syllabic in non syllabic sounds. Phonetics is the branch of linguistics that is concerned with scientific study of speech sounds. There are three main areas in phonetics. Articulatory fanatics, which deals with how the vocal organs produce speech. Acoustic phonetics, which deals with the physical characteristics of speech, such as duration. Frequency and intensity of sounds and auditory phonetics, which examines the perception of speech by the auditory system. They're all interrelated. All these branches of phonetics are interrelated because a change in the articulatory configuration of the vocal tract results in acoustic changes, which in turn potentially affect the perception of a sound. So you see how they're all related to each other, although they are separated. For in-depth study of each. This is, you just move. So I can see, you can see the illustration better. Neither the speech organs. And there are three main subsystems in, in the system involved in speech. There is the separate cultural system, the larynx, and the sub glottal system, including here marked so this is the larynx and then underneath we've got the trachea, lungs. And above the larynx you go the oral and nasal cavity. The larynx is essential for producing speech sounds, and it contains two vocal folds, vibrate. During voice sounds. The vibration is cold. You can guess voicing. The vibration produces voiced consonants. Lack of it. Lack of vibration produces a voiceless consonants. Voiced consonant will be, but when we produce sounds like it is voiced, vocal folds vibrate, whereas they don't do that. When we produce voiceless consonants, like adjusting the tension of the vocal folds during voicing, you can change the fundamental frequency and hence the pitch of a sound. Fundamental frequency refers to the physical property of rate of vocal fold, vibration. And pitch refers to the perception of the sound on a scale of low to high. So when we refer to how we perceive sounds, we say we have high or low pitch. But when we talk about the production, we'll talk about that frequency of the vocal fold vibration. In this picture, you can see different glocal states. So these glottal States illustrates the representation of the vocal folds and the glottis from above. So the anterior portion of the larynx is towards the top. And the small triangles you see, they help spread or close the vocal folds. At the back, you see the little missal, even triangles, the arytenoid cartilages, and they regulate how much. I'm going to close up the vocal cords. So you see the different positions based on whether we're producing voiceless and voiced sounds. You see the vibration that I mentioned before in the voiced sound. And like this, we shut the vocal folds. And the murmur is a different type. You see there's vibration. There's different type of vibration, different type of opening, opening of the folds. When we murmur, then we'll, we're fully voicing. Now. We will look at the two cavities above the larynx. And because this is the area that contains most of the structures that are manipulated in speech. When you use different articulators to produce speech, you're changing the place of articulation. So if you look at this picture here, you use different parts of your lips and teeth as we had before. Bilabial sounds. They use both lips. They use let, upper teeth and lower lip and apathy. And then your tongue changes position whether it's pushed forward or backward to produce different sounds. We have e.g. alveolar ridge, ridge here, which helps us produce income. Connection in contact with that tongue helps us produce alveolar sounds. And then we've got e.g. velar sounds that further back towards the throat and tongue moves backwards in order to produce different sounds. And we will look at it. All of the different positions of different sounds in English and also compare it to some other languages. Talk about the similarities and differences so that you can understand what things may or may not be shared and how languages, languages differ in terms of their sound systems. Now, see the seven classes. The main distinction here is the vowels, consonants and glides. Glides are kind of, they have properties of both consonants and vowels. So when I introduce this topic to the beginning, I said, we're going to focus on consonants and vowels. But of course, there is a special class of sounds as well. Who are sorry, which are, which are kinda behave like. They're like, I'm rapidly articulating the bowels. That's the auditory impression. We will come to that in a moment. Let's look first at the syllabus. Default consonants that can be voiced or voiceless. They could be made with narrow or complete closure of the vocal tract. With vowels, they are always voiced and they are produced with little abstraction in the vocal tract, the most sonorous than consonants and perceived as louder and long lasting. And then glides, as I said, would think of them as we perceive them as rapidly articulated vowels. Though they Patton like consonants. We have yet. Boy. Now. So, yeah, they do pattern in their appearance as you see here in this example, they seem to behave like consonants. But in terms of articulation, they, they do appear to be to have some kind of mowing quality. Now syllabic and non syllabic sounds. So let's look at the definition of syllabus first. So syllables are defined as a peak of sincerity surrounded by less sun or segments. Vowels are the basis of syllables because of their great sincerity. They formed the nucleus of a syllable. And let's see some examples of what syllables are. So if we look at the example and go, those are monosyllabic words. They have only one syllable, two syllables, law, thing. You're basically looking at how many vowels you got, and then whatever surrounds those vowels goes with that vowel to form a syllable. So LA, thing. I'm not really three syllables, testlet. Three syllables. And some consonants can also form syllabic. Can you create so you don't need to obligatory, usually you have a vowel. Most difficult kind of syllable is a vowel. But we do have, for some reason not going to lie. I'm collecting but apologies for that. I don't want to use this this recording. Sorry about this interruption. I had we had notes about my bachelor then those black somewhere else. Let's go back. Here we go. So we are now looking at consonants being the heart of the syllable. So we said normally it's the vowels that have the heart and the syllable. However, some consonants are capable of the nucleus. The core itself. What these are. If you see this funny lessons here, don't worry about this now too much. This is the International Phonetic Alphabet. And I will be showing you those symbols and we'll be discussing them. And you will have, you will familiarize yourselves with the alphabet. And we'll be able to use the alphabet to answer questions in your exam. Oops, go back. So this word, normally if we were in the classroom, I would ask you now, let's guess for these words up. Since we're online. I can't do that. So I will just tell him what these words up. This word, the first word is a rhythm. If you see the first syllable ray, this upside down, rho is the newer way of referring to the sound rep. We won't go into the details why different versions of the phonetic International Phonetic Alphabet are different. We don't worry about that. Just know that this refers to the center rep, rip them. So in the second portion of this word, we don't have vowels. We do have a kind of sonorous consonants. That is, that is playing the role of a vowel, and therefore we have two syllables here. Read them. If you get a question in the exam, how many syllables does this word have? And you don't see a vowel. You will know that sounds, consonants, consonants. Some sonorous consonants can be the carriers of the syllables and play the role of the mouth. Similarly, it happens in the following word, which is, which one is that funnel? So this little thing at the bottom here tells you this is the information that this is a syllabic sound, is the carrier of a syllable even though a consonant. Night. So you will have that kind of information. If this appears in an exam, you will need to know what this means, as I'm telling you now. So you can remember that this things I'm carrying a syllable sounds next to me and myself. As a sonorous consonants, We're falling a syllable even though what we would expect about. But some consonants can do that. And these are the two examples. You don't need to memorize what syllabic consonant nuclei are. Because you will be given this information here in the international phonetic alphabet. So if you have this example, you will know what this means. You don't have to worry about that. Just trying to understand the concept of syllabic cannot syllabic sounds. Okay, so we will, here, we're looking at orthography, which means how we write those letters and then we pronounce. And their spelling. Orthography does not necessarily perfectly matches onto sound. And certainly in English, we don't have consistent phonetics is a science. And we must devise a way for the same sounds to be spelled with the same letter every time. So if you look at the confusion that this spelling causes us, you will understand why people came up, why phoneticians came up with international phonetic alphabet to represent the sounds in language. I just imagined to look at this example here, which reads, did he believe that Caesar could see the people sees the sea? Or the second sentence in this example, the cilia amoeba stole the key to the machine. You can see that the same sound, e is represented variously by all of these different combination of vowels and glides. And on the other hand, we have the following example. My father wanted many of village day badly. We have one in the same letter, but different pronunciations of the same letter. So it goes both ways. Different spellings, the same pronunciation, the letter E, or the same spelling, letter a, but completely different sounds. You have to be pronounced. And therefore, we have to use for our convenience. And this is what phoneticians you, this what we use it with fixed end. This is what we use when we are trying to understand sounds of languages that may have spelling systems which are really difficult to follow them. As we have the International Phonetic Alphabet, we understand what the sound is in that language because we can compare it to the sounds that we have in our life. Let's say English for this specific purposes here. So you will see in the textbook, there's a, there's a international phonetic alphabet and the examples. So please, please check out those sections and phonetics and phonology in more detail to see all the different sounds. And as I said, I will be giving you sort of easy to refer to tables for both consonants and vowels so you know how to describe them. We'll look at the pronunciation first and the International Phonetic Alphabet that we can understand more easily if we have the words in English next to the sound. If you look at obviously this and there are some really easy sounds here like pub. And they are identical to the letters that are used to spell them. However, then we have got the thigh. And the symbol here with a round circle. Cross in the middle is the symbol for the latter. And the voiced version of it, as in die, just below it. Here is the voiced version, and again, it's spelled as the H, but the pronunciation is that it is, it helps us, it helps us understand the voiced, voiceless contrast of the same spelling. The then we've got different symbols for a shirt is like this, Alan gated, S as in shoe, and then sound, which occurs in many different languages, but it could be spelled very differently in English here in this word measure, it's spelled with S, but it's pronounced. Again. Let's look at some other interesting sounds here. So we've got, as I said, some of the sounds are represented the same in spelling and in International Phonetic Alphabet, but some are different. So e.g. if you look at shirt and Joe here, they are spelled differently, but this is their pronunciation. This is how they are pronounced, and this is the symbol. So when somebody is learning English for the first time, it doesn't know that this is not. Again, they need to look in the brackets to see how it's pronounced and understand attic alphabets and say this is actually here, it's pronounced. So we can see this symbol, you know, the pronunciation also when you're learning another language for the first time and you see this symbol, you know? Uh-huh. It's from English. It's like Joe, from English. They have the same styles which you may not recognize if you just look at the spelling. This is why we have, you know, and into dictionaries, you have different versions of this International Phonetic Alphabet, which gives you sort of slanted brackets the pronunciation of specific words. Similarly for the vowels, we've got the different representations of vowels. So we got E, 0, et cetera. And I will give you the, I think it's the next slide where I give you let me check. Yes. Becomes a bit later in the presentation of how we classified the how we classify the sounds based on their position. So we're coming to that in a moment. I just wanted to give you this really short version. International Phonetic Alphabet is a bigger eight, marks, different. More detail in, in pronunciation. There are more sounds as well, not just English sounds. Their sounds in International Phonetic Alphabet did not exist in English. This is just a short snippets of the sounds in English. But we will look at when we do some, some examples. Later on. I will include the whole set of one page. Lot of information, different sounds of the world that are not necessarily exclusively to enrich. For starters, we're gonna just, we're just looking at the sounds in English and how they are presented in the International Phonetic Alphabet. This is something you will need to learn about sounds in languages and depending on their representations. So I would, perhaps, you will see in one of the assignments, in the first assignment, when you do, you get the symbol from the I'm from international phonetic alphabet and you are asked, Okay, can you define this as in terms of place of articulation? So now we're looking at place of articulation for consonants. And these are the possible places of articulation that as I said, we'll focus on English at the moment because we are being taught in English. But linguistics is not only about English, it's about every different language of the world. And I will, as an introduction, just focus on English sounds and descriptions. But then we're going to look towards the end of the week, we're going to look at other languages, sounds. And it's not going to be just on English in case you were wondering. Because we all speak English, we're focusing on understanding the concept of the place of articulation. Music, English sentence. So we've got bilabials, means two lips involved, and these are the sounds here. And what? We got, labiodental, meaning upper teeth and lower lip, purely dental sound, alveolar. Remember in the initial illustration I had on the oral nasal cavity where most of the actions speech happens in terms of different types of, um, and manners of articulation. So alveolar is the area of the upper, upper ridge. And we pronounce the sounds to the left and not using just behind that area. And to make alveolar sounds. Then we go to palatal alveolar. We're using the Palette Palette to pronounce. Sure. We notice the position of the tongue is different. Jug and a palatal side poses oppose ovule or sound and the purely palatal sounds. Then we go to the velum. Velum is towards the back of our throat. And the sounds cooker and and labial velar. Because we're using, Let's put the sound comes from the band uvular, which we use our usual, we don't have that sound in English. This is those of you who speak French or who have this sand. This is using the, you've led a little tiny bit that they're the throat uvular sound French. Then pharyngeal sounds fun in Arabic. And we're going to try to pronounce this. Really. I'm sort of the sounds. I don't know how to pronounce, but those of you who speak Arabic and help me, and we have glottal sounds. We use the glottis like to pronounce sounds like I don't think I'm doing, It's really super right? With a glottal stop or try, something like that. But let's see if we can icon just like that. But I'll see you in a glottal stop in a moment so that I can, I can pronounce it properly for you. Can think of one now, so sorry. Okay, we got articulation of consonants, manner. So this is previously with those with a place where the constants are pronounced and now we're dealing with matter. So the first distinction here for you is oral versus nasal. That distinction is illustrated in the contrast of vertices. So we have air through our nose when we're pronouncing, which you don't have one way of pronouncing. But the sound, but then we have stops. Its means. There is some kind of clear barrier and obstruction in this one we're producing, this sounds like good. So the obstruction could come in different places, but it's always a career obstruction. Whereas with fricatives, sound vibrates and flows more freely, there's not a clear barrier into production. And then we have the sounds of the show and you can feel the friction as you browse. Then we'll go to Africa, which, uh, which kind of glued somehow Group Sounds good together. You can see that with, you can see that in the international phonetic alphabet symbols, they're kind of sounds which are almost united into one. And there's a lot more involvement of complex, more complex articulation in the pronunciation of Africans. Then we've got liquids and glides. Those are very interesting sounds. As I said, it's somehow have some kind of properties or vowels, even though there is some more obstruction, of course then in articulation, articulation of vowels when we are, they're not as open as assistance in sonorant the vowels, but they do show some behavior. Vowels, like syllabic behavior or being perceived as, as sort of vowel equality in the case of one. Now we have another distinction in the manner of articulation, which is very often difficult to perceive and to produce if you don't have it in your own language. And we'll come back to us with duration. That's the thing we're dealing with here. We'll come back to it when we look at some examples. Aspiration to explain it in the most accessible way is a distinction between the kind of air that is included in the production of aspirated versus an aspirated sounds. So if you look at the examples here, it's easier to, to kind of figure it out with examines. You look at the word hat is at the beginning of the word and you can feel the kind of explosion of air, more effective explosion. That's the aspiration sounding in this word. Whereas if you say spat, it is not as emphatic there as production is top versus stop. So if it's not initial, then we will not have tap. We have stopped. So we are already influenced by the other sounds that we don't have. Similarly cope. You see the kind of exploration when you pronounce it versus scope. Different quality of. Then we've got also another manner of articulation, which is frill, which we don't have any English. And when we do have it in Spanish and Britain example in the word pattern. And also we've got a difference in, we've got a sound called flap, like an American English writer, rider. As in Spanish, pedal will vary. So this is another, another sound called the flap. It's very different. You can hear it from the thrilled in paragraphs. So this is a different manner of articulation. Here are the symbols for American English consonants. Here. Notice that in this case, the rho here is the right way up. As I said, different authors, different tables, except different representation of this liquid alveolar sound. Don't worry too much about it. That will be moot. It doesn't matter for our exam or anything, you will get the table I want you to use. And I will show you what table I'll give you for the exam towards the end of this week's lecture. So whichever way you represent this out, it doesn't really, doesn't really matter as long as you understand. The sound is, the articulation is. And that is the important bits. Here. You've got both the place and manner of articulation, but we'll discuss now so you can see if your ask to define, let say. Sound like let's look at something. And let's go for this. It's palatal. For right. Now, just collation of vowels. Simple vowels do not show a change of quality within syllables, so it's cut. Whereas diphthong exhibit a change of quality within a syllable. So as they say, you start with one and end with another. Apply. So those are different things. There is a change of quality of vowel within a syllable. And this is how we distinguish between simple vowels and diphthongs. And the, you have them all labeled here simple vowels and victims of American English. In all cancer, victims are somewhat longer with a sample vowels. So that's the, in terms of articulation you have. Sorry. If you, if you want a diphthong pronunciation, you kinda just make it a bit longer in your articulation. Yeah, so the examples of simple vowels here at Pitts set cat and hot. And also cut vote. But suppose. And then we've got heat. Say, buy a cow, lose, Bro. Let's look at some vowel articulation. Here. You will notice if you say words like he and pull, you will feel your tongue move from a high front of the low back position. And once you, once you do that from heat to pour, now go to Paul to pat, you will feel the tongue moving again from the low back to the low front position. And finally, we've got rounding. And all this is shown very well in the x-ray studies of speech that are done with the phonetics. So we know exactly where the tongue is doing because we've seen it on x-ray and you can actually feel it if you're focused on articulation and do it slow and you'll see all the movements that are described here. If the tongue is not neither high nor low, disposition is made and we have mid vowels. So an example of the English word made or fame. Vowels, mid, front, end and rounded. E.g. another example here, the vowels of code and soak are also made, but they are back and rounded. And these are the classification of vowels which I need you to familiarize yourself with. You don't need to memorize this. You will have something like this accessible for the exam where you can just trace the vowels in order to describe it, but you need to really be familiar with the main differences so you can do the exam in good time. So depending on the tongue height, position, we have high, medium, low, and we go front, central and back. And we will also look at tension in the vows of it later. Now we'll describe a little bit more about that in here. So please look at look at the textbook examples. I think I put a page, I can't remember what the tradition I use page 202. And this is this looks more like close to the mouth representation of how we pronounce front central back. So imagine that this is somebody that is looking. I'm looking towards the front. This is the front of the mouth, ventral back. And you can see the different interesting pronunciation here. I said, how would you pronounce caught and cot? Same pronunciation in British English, you have this cart here, this vowel, whereas in British English pronunciation and the American Association of British English would be for the beds and OH, I quote, I caught a fish. So there are two different vowels. Whereas in American English, I do believe, although I cannot replicate that, you're doing. You pronounce this in the same way like cot and caught much lower on the vowel chart. Okay, and here's another example. Another way of representing words with, but this time with vowels so that you know, again, we have high, middle, low vowels here. Then we have the words where these vowels occur so that it's easy for you to understand what vowel is involved in which. So two representations of the international phonetic alphabet. So we have the bleed and then let, etc. So if you have any questions about this and you'll practice a lot of classification inscription of vowels in your sections. It's also part of your first assignments, so please feel free to reach out to me or your TAs, if anything, is unclear about how we describe the vowels, how we pronounce certain vowels, those of you, perhaps not native speaker of English, may have certain amount of difficulty with some of the vowels that you may not have in your languages. In your L1 if first languages, but that's not a problem this can be trying to learn. And of course, as I said for the exam, you will have the chart in front of you. So you will use this description and descriptive terms. You just need to familiarize yourselves to be able to trace the necessary information fast when you're doing the exam. But as I said, this will be practiced sections. Okay, these are the links I put here. So you can see the the whole of International Phonetic Alphabet. Let me see. Links work. Yes. So this is the toolkit, International Phonetic Alphabet, and you'll see this, there's so many more sounds and those in English. And you can click on them and see how they are pronounced. So the English IPA chart that I showed you is simplified because it's only contains the sounds in English. Whereas here we have a much, much more developed shot for representing, as I said, sounds in all languages. So you can use this, this child just out of curiosity to see what other sounds exist. Go back to my presentation and I think I've got this one for you here as well. You see you can, you can click and go between American and British English. So I see British English, that's similar. Sounds. If it was 0. That gives you the International Phonetic. I select everything and British English or American English. No difference here. Yes, let me see them so you can play around with it and see all of the sounds of all. Let's just look now at the type of articulation. And these are some of the processes that happened when sounds are close together and they become kind of fused in articulation because of their proximity. So one of these processes called the simulation, happens when two sounds become more alike with respect to one another. In terms of one or more fanatic characteristics. So if you look at impossible, intolerable, same prefix, meaning negative of like M has different. I'm appearances here precisely because of the sound that follow-ups and both bilabial sounds. And it makes sense to say new possible rather than in the possible. There's much more effort involved. And therefore, the prefix, the negative prefix becomes a map in this case, whereas it is in, because the next sound is much closer in articulation to nest. So again, saying tolerable will be much more effort. And this is simply not done because we have the proximity of sounds, but we'll try to articulate them with less. We've got some examples of naturalization next slide in a moment, and we've got the voicing in the end. Depending on, you know, we got to be following the bowel. These dogs, dogs, we have, again, Bao. Sorry, we go to sonorant consonants. It is the voiced consonant. Whereas if we have voiceless consonants, then we have cat. It is not anymore, but it is a voiced consonant or a vowel that the, that the plural ending follows, but it becomes with a voiced sound. Okay, Now let's look at this simulation examples. So this relation is when two sounds become less alike. It's much rarer in, in, in language to be, to be fair this poses. So let say the word fifth to pronounce. And this is in brackets here to see if they're so similar, all of these sounds in articulation, and therefore, we kind of tried to simulate between them because it's too hard to articulate and this becomes fed. You know, in your regular speech, you're more likely to say if it's just because it's easy to fix, just getting rid of them. It'll tell you even which is deletion. That's something that we have here later. But the simulation is when sounds too similar together cannot easily co-exist beans and articulated in there for there changed to be less separately. Okay, then we have the deletion process that removes the segment from certain phonetic contexts below. So you see the deletion in English. In her raid becomes prayed. And then corrodes becomes crowed. And suppose becomes pose. That's a very common example. Then we've got a parenthesis, which is insertion of a segment within an existing string of sudden example here of the parenthesis are when you say something. But then what you do is you insert a segment there, which shouldn't be there, like some thing. Some thing. It should be just some thing. Then we insert that some thing. Once again, warm. Similar thing happens in Turkish as well. I just included this one in many other languages. Turkish, this is an interesting vow and pentoses just to facilitate the personalization of foreign words that are adopted into Turkish light chain. It's a very hard sequencing Turkish. We'll talk about the sequences that are allowed or not allowed in different languages. But in this sequence would be very weird and Turkish, and therefore we have the Pentheus is to facilitate pronunciation, like tearing. Similarly club. Sports support. I'm probably making a massive It's Turkish down but I'm trying my best. So these are the insertions to facilitate articulation. Okay, now, let's look at some prosodic properties. This is one of the terms we are going to be defining here, the super segmental. I think we will have a little break here just to make sure that this recording will be uploaded and works. I'll make it too heavy. We already have so many tech issues. So bear with me while I save what I've done so far for you and then I will continue in a moment.
